211. In the late Middle Ages there were four main civilizations that
   were about equally "advanced": Europe, the Islamic world, India, and
   the Far East (China, Japan, Korea). Three of those civilizations
   remained more or less stable, and only Europe became dynamic. No one
   knows why Europe became dynamic at that time; historians have their
   theories but these are only speculation. At any rate, it is clear that
   rapid development toward a technological form of society occurs only
   under special conditions. So there is no reason to assume that
   long-lasting technological regression cannot be brought about.
   
   212. Would society EVENTUALLY develop again toward an
   industrial-technological form? Maybe, but there is no use in worrying
   about it, since we can't predict or control events 500 or 1,000 years
   in the future. Those problems must be dealt with by the people who
   will live at that time.
   
  THE DANGER OF LEFTISM
  
   
   
   213. Because of their need for rebellion and for membership in a
   movement, leftists or persons of similar psychological type are often
   unattracted to a rebellious or activist movement whose goals and
   membership are not initially leftist. The resulting influx of leftish
   types can easily turn a non-leftist movement into a leftist one, so
   that leftist goals replace or distort the original goals of the
   movement.
   
   214. To avoid this, a movement that exalts nature and opposes
   technology must take a resolutely anti-leftist stance and must avoid
   all collaboration with leftists. Leftism is in the long run
   inconsistent with wild nature, with human freedom and with the
   elimination of modern technology. Leftism is collectivist; it seeks to
   bind together the entire world (both nature and the human race) into a
   unified whole. But this implies management of nature and of human life
   by organized society, and it requires advanced technology. You can't
   have a united world without rapid transportation and communication,
   you can't make all people love one another without sophisticated
   psychological techniques, you can't have a "planned society" without
   the necessary technological base. Above all, leftism is driven by the
   need for power, and the leftist seeks power on a collective basis,
   through identification with a mass movement or an organization.
   Leftism is unlikely ever to give up technology, because technology is
   too valuable a source of collective power.
   
   215. The anarchist [34] too seeks power, but he seeks it on an
   individual or small-group basis; he wants individuals and small groups
   to be able to control the circumstances of their own lives. He opposes
   technology because it makes small groups dependent on large
   organizations.
   
   216. Some leftists may seem to oppose technology, but they will oppose
   it only so long as they are outsiders and the technological system is
   controlled by non-leftists. If leftism ever becomes dominant in
   society, so that the technological system becomes a tool in the hands
   of leftists, they will enthusiastically use it and promote its growth.
   In doing this they will be repeating a pattern that leftism has shown
   again and again in the past. When the Bolsheviks in Russia were
   outsiders, they vigorously opposed censorship and the secret police,
   they advocated self-determination for ethnic minorities, and so forth;
   but as soon as they came into power themselves, they imposed a tighter
   censorship and created a more ruthless secret police than any that had
   existed under the tsars, and they oppressed ethnic minorities at least
   as much as the tsars had done. In the United States, a couple of
   decades ago when leftists were a minority in our universities, leftist
   professors were vigorous proponents of academic freedom, but today, in
   those universities where leftists have become dominant, they have
   shown themselves ready to take away from everyone else's academic
   freedom. (This is "political correctness.") The same will happen with
   leftists and technology: They will use it to oppress everyone else if
   they ever get it under their own control.
   
   217. In earlier revolutions, leftists of the most power-hungry type,
   repeatedly, have first cooperated with non-leftist revolutionaries, as
   well as with leftists of a more libertarian inclination, and later
   have double-crossed them to seize power for themselves. Robespierre
   did this in the French Revolution, the Bolsheviks did it in the
   Russian Revolution, the communists did it in Spain in 1938 and Castro
   and his followers did it in Cuba. Given the past history of leftism,
   it would be utterly foolish for non-leftist revolutionaries today to
   collaborate with leftists.
   
   218. Various thinkers have pointed out that leftism is a kind of
   religion. Leftism is not a religion in the strict sense because
   leftist doctrine does not postulate the existence of any supernatural
   being. But for the leftist, leftism plays a psychological role much
   like that which religion plays for some people. The leftist NEEDS to
   believe in leftism; it plays a vital role in his psychological
   economy. His beliefs are not easily modified by logic or facts. He has
   a deep conviction that leftism is morally Right with a capital R, and
   that he has not only a right but a duty to impose leftist morality on
   everyone. (However, many of the people we are referring to as
   "leftists" do not think of themselves as leftists and would not
   describe their system of beliefs as leftism. We use the term "leftism"
   because we don't know of any better words to designate the spectrum of
   related creeds that includes the feminist, gay rights, political
   correctness, etc., movements, and because these movements have a
   strong affinity with the old left. See paragraphs 227-230.)
   
   219. Leftism is totalitarian force. Wherever leftism is in a position
   of power it tends to invade every private corner and force every
   thought into a leftist mold. In part this is because of the
   quasi-religious character of leftism; everything contrary to leftists
   beliefs represents Sin. More importantly, leftism is a totalitarian
   force because of the leftists' drive for power. The leftist seeks to
   satisfy his need for power through identification with a social
   movement and he tries to go through the power process by helping to
   pursue and attain the goals of the movement (see paragraph 83). But no
   matter how far the movement has gone in attaining its goals the
   leftist is never satisfied, because his activism is a surrogate
   activity (see paragraph 41). That is, the leftist's real motive is not
   to attain the ostensible goals of leftism; in reality he is motivated
   by the sense of power he gets from struggling for and then reaching a
   social goal.[35]
   
   Consequently the leftist is never satisfied with the goals he has
   already attained; his need for the power process leads him always to
   pursue some new goal. The leftist wants equal opportunities for
   minorities. When that is attained he insists on statistical equality
   of achievement by minorities. And as long as anyone harbors in some
   corner of his mind a negative attitude toward some minority, the
   leftist has to re-educated him. And ethnic minorities are not enough;
   no one can be allowed to have a negative attitude toward homosexuals,
   disabled people, fat people, old people, ugly people, and on and on
   and on. It's not enough that the public should be informed about the
   hazards of smoking; a warning has to be stamped on every package of
   cigarettes. Then cigarette advertising has to be restricted if not
   banned. The activists will never be satisfied until tobacco is
   outlawed, and after that it will be alco hot then junk food, etc.
   Activists have fought gross child abuse, which is reasonable. But now
   they want to stop all spanking. When they have done that they will
   want to ban something else they consider unwholesome, then another
   thing and then another. They will never be satisfied until they have
   complete control over all child rearing practices. And then they will
   move on to another cause.
   
   220. Suppose you asked leftists to make a list of ALL the things that
   were wrong with society, and then suppose you instituted EVERY social
   change that they demanded. It is safe to say that within a couple of
   years the majority of leftists would find something new to complain
   about, some new social "evil" to correct because, once again, the
   leftist is motivated less by distress at society's ills than by the
   need to satisfy his drive for power by imposing his solutions on
   society.
   
   221. Because of the restrictions placed on their thoughts and behavior
   by their high level of socialization, many leftists of the
   over-socialized type cannot pursue power in the ways that other people
   do. For them the drive for power has only one morally acceptable
   outlet, and that is in the struggle to impose their morality on
   everyone.
   
   222. Leftists, especially those of the oversocialized type, are True
   Believers in the sense of Eric Hoffer's book, "The True Believer." But
   not all True Believers are of the same psychological type as leftists.
   Presumably a truebelieving nazi, for instance is very different
   psychologically from a truebelieving leftist. Because of their
   capacity for single-minded devotion to a cause, True Believers are a
   useful, perhaps a necessary, ingredient of any revolutionary movement.
   This presents a problem with which we must admit we don't know how to
   deal. We aren't sure how to harness the energies of the True Believer
   to a revolution against technology. At present all we can say is that
   no True Believer will make a safe recruit to the revolution unless his
   commitment is exclusively to the destruction of technology. If he is
   committed also to another ideal, he may want to use technology as a
   tool for pursuing that other ideal (see paragraphs 220, 221).
   
   223. Some readers may say, "This stuff about leftism is a lot of crap.
   I know John and Jane who are leftish types and they don't have all
   these totalitarian tendencies." It's quite true that many leftists,
   possibly even a numerical majority, are decent people who sincerely
   believe in tolerating others' values (up to a point) and wouldn't want
   to use high-handed methods to reach their social goals. Our remarks
   about leftism are not meant to apply to every individual leftist but
   to describe the general character of leftism as a movement. And the
   general character of a movement is not necessarily determined by the
   numerical proportions of the various kinds of people involved in the
   movement.
   
   224. The people who rise to positions of power in leftist movements
   tend to be leftists of the most power-hungry type because power-hungry
   people are those who strive hardest to get into positions of power.
   Once the power-hungry types have captured control of the movement,
   there are many leftists of a gentler breed who inwardly disapprove of
   many of the actions of the leaders, but cannot bring themselves to
   oppose them. They NEED their faith in the movement, and because they
   cannot give up this faith they go along with the leaders. True, SOME
   leftists do have the guts to oppose the totalitarian tendencies that
   emerge, but they generally lose, because the power-hungry types are
   better organized, are more ruthless and Machiavellian and have taken
   care to build themselves a strong power base.
   
   225. These phenomena appeared clearly in Russia and other countries
   that were taken over by leftists. Similarly, before the breakdown of
   communism in the USSR, leftish types in the West would seldom
   criticize that country. If prodded they would admit that the USSR did
   many wrong things, but then they would try to find excuses for the
   communists and begin talking about the faults of the West. They always
   opposed Western military resistance to communist aggression. Leftish
   types all over the world vigorously protested the U.S. military action
   in Vietnam, but when the USSR invaded Afghanistan they did nothing.
   Not that they approved of the Soviet actions; but because of their
   leftist faith, they just couldn't bear to put themselves in opposition
   to communism. Today, in those of our universities where "political
   correctness" has become dominant, there are probably many leftish
   types who privately disapprove of the suppression of academic freedom,
   but they go along with it anyway.
   
   226. Thus the fact that many individual leftists are personally mild
   and fairly tolerant people by no means prevents leftism as a whole
   form having a totalitarian tendency.
   
   227. Our discussion of leftism has a serious weakness. It is still far
   from clear what we mean by the word "leftist." There doesn't seem to
   be much we can do about this. Today leftism is fragmented into a whole
   spectrum of activist movements. Yet not all activist movements are
   leftist, and some activist movements (e.g.., radical environmentalism)
   seem to include both personalities of the leftist type and
   personalities of thoroughly un-leftist types who ought to know better
   than to collaborate with leftists. Varieties of leftists fade out
   gradually into varieties of non-leftists and we ourselves would often
   be hard-pressed to decide whether a given individual is or is not a
   leftist. To the extent that it is defined at all, our conception of
   leftism is defined by the discussion of it that we have given in this
   article, and we can only advise the reader to use his own judgment in
   deciding who is a leftist.
   
   228. But it will be helpful to list some criteria for diagnosing
   leftism. These criteria cannot be applied in a cut and dried manner.
   Some individuals may meet some of the criteria without being leftists,
   some leftists may not meet any of the criteria. Again, you just have
   to use your judgment.
   
   229. The leftist is oriented toward largescale collectivism. He
   emphasizes the duty of the individual to serve society and the duty of
   society to take care of the individual. He has a negative attitude
   toward individualism. He often takes a moralistic tone. He tends to be
   for gun control, for sex education and other psychologically
   "enlightened" educational methods, for planning, for affirmative
   action, for multiculturalism. He tends to identify with victims. He
   tends to be against competition and against violence, but he often
   finds excuses for those leftists who do commit violence. He is fond of
   using the common catch-phrases of the left like "racism, " "sexism, "
   "homophobia, " "capitalism," "imperialism," "neocolonialism "
   "genocide," "social change," "social justice," "social
   responsibility." Maybe the best diagnostic trait of the leftist is his
   tendency to sympathize with the following movements: feminism, gay
   rights, ethnic rights, disability rights, animal rights political
   correctness. Anyone who strongly sympathizes with ALL of these
   movements is almost certainly a leftist. [36]
   
   230. The more dangerous leftists, that is, those who are most
   power-hungry, are often characterized by arrogance or by a dogmatic
   approach to ideology. However, the most dangerous leftists of all may
   be certain oversocialized types who avoid irritating displays of
   aggressiveness and refrain from advertising their leftism, but work
   quietly and unobtrusively to promote collectivist values,
   "enlightened" psychological techniques for socializing children,
   dependence of the individual on the system, and so forth. These
   crypto-leftists (as we may call them) approximate certain bourgeois
   types as far as practical action is concerned, but differ from them in
   psychology, ideology and motivation. The ordinary bourgeois tries to
   bring people under control of the system in order to protect his way
   of life, or he does so simply because his attitudes are conventional.
   The crypto-leftist tries to bring people under control of the system
   because he is a True Believer in a collectivistic ideology. The
   crypto-leftist is differentiated from the average leftist of the
   oversocialized type by the fact that his rebellious impulse is weaker
   and he is more securely socialized. He is differentiated from the
   ordinary well-socialized bourgeois by the fact that there is some deep
   lack within him that makes it necessary for him to devote himself to a
   cause and immerse himself in a collectivity. And maybe his
   (well-sublimated) drive for power is stronger than that of the average
   bourgeois.
   
   FINAL NOTE
   
   231. Throughout this article we've made imprecise statements and
   statements that ought to have had all sorts of qualifications and
   reservations attached to them; and some of our statements may be
   flatly false. Lack of sufficient information and the need for brevity
   made it impossible for us to fomulate our assertions more precisely or
   add all the necessary qualifications. And of course in a discussion of
   this
   
   kind one must rely heavily on intuitive judgment, and that can
   sometimes be wrong. So we don't claim that this article expresses more
   than a crude approximation to the truth.
   
   232. All the same we are reasonably confident that the general
   outlines of the picture we have painted here are roughly correct. We
   have portrayed leftism in its modern form as a phenomenon peculiar to
   our time and as a symptom of the disruption of the power process. But
   we might possibly be wrong about this. Oversocialized types who try to
   satisfy their drive for power by imposing their morality on everyone
   have certainly been around for a long time. But we THINK that the
   decisive role played by feelings of inferiority, low self-esteem,
   powerlessness, identification with victims by people who are not
   themselves victims, is a peculiarity of modern leftism. Identification
   with victims by people not themselves victims can be seen to some
   extent in 19th century leftism and early Christianity but as far as we
   can make out, symptoms of low self-esteem, etc., were not nearly so
   evident in these movements, or in any other movements, as they are in
   modern leftism. But we are not in a position to assert confidently
   that no such movements have existed prior to modern leftism. This is a
   significant question to which historians ought to give their
   attention.
   
   NOTES
   
   1. (Paragraph 19) We are asserting that ALL, or even most, bullies and
   ruthless competitors suffer from feelings of inferiority.
   
   2. (Paragraph 25) During the Victorian period many oversocialized
   people suffered from serious psychological problems as a result of
   repressing or trying to repress their sexual feelings. Freud
   apparently based his theories on people of this type. Today the focus
   of socialization has shifted from sex to aggression.
   
   3. (Paragraph 27) Not necessarily including specialists in engineering
   "hard" sciences.
   
   4. (Paragraph 28) There are many individuals of the middle and upper
   classes who resist some of these values, but usually their resistance
   is more or less covert. Such resistance appears in the mass media only
   to a very limited extent. The main thrust of propaganda in our society
   is in favor of the stated values.
   
   The main reasons why these values have become, so to speak, the
   official values of our society is that they are useful to the
   industrial system. Violence is discouraged because it disrupts the
   functioning of the system. Racism is discouraged because ethnic
   conflicts also disrupt the system, and discrimination wastes the
   talent of minority-group members who could be useful to the system.
   Poverty must be "cured" because the underclass causes problems for the
   system and contact with the underclass lowers the moral of the other
   classes. Women are encouraged to have careers because their talents
   are useful to the system and, more importantly because by having
   regular jobs women become better integrated into the system and tied
   directly to it rather than to their families. This helps to weaken
   family solidarity. (The leaders of the system say they want to
   strengthen the family, but they really mean is that they want the
   family to serve as an effective tool for socializing children in
   accord with the needs of the system. We argue in paragraphs 51,52 that
   the system cannot afford to let the family or other small-scale social
   groups be strong or autonomous.)
   
   5. (Paragraph 42) It may be argued that the majority of people don't
   want to make their own decisions but want leaders to do their thinking
   for them. There is an element of truth in this. People like to make
   their own decisions in small matters, but making decisions on
   difficult, fundamental questions require facing up to psychological
   conflict, and most people hate psychological conflict. Hence they tend
   to lean on others in making difficult decisions. The majority of
   people are natural followers, not leaders, but they like to have
   direct personal access to their leaders and participate to some extent
   in making difficult decisions. At least to that degree they need
   autonomy.
   
   6. (Paragraph 44) Some of the symptoms listed are similar to those
   shown by caged animals.
   
   To explain how these symptoms arise from deprivation with respect to
   the power process:
   
   Common-sense understanding of human nature tells one that lack of
   goals whose attainment requires effort leads to boredom and that
   boredom, long continued, often leads eventually to depression. Failure
   to obtain goals leads to frustration and lowering of self-esteem.
   Frustration leads to anger, anger to aggression, often in the form of
   spouse or child abuse. It has been shown that long-continued
   frustration commonly leads to depression and that depression tends to
   cause guilt, sleep disorders, eating disorders and bad feelings about
   oneself. Those who are tending toward depression seek pleasure as an
   antidote; hence insatiable hedonism and excessive sex, with
   perversions as a means of getting new kicks. Boredom too tends to
   cause excessive pleasure-seeking since, lacking other goals, people
   often use pleasure as a goal. See accompanying diagram. The foregoing
   is a simplification. Reality is more complex, and of course
   deprivation with respect to the power process is not the ONLY cause of
   the symptoms described. By the way, when we mention depression we do
   not necessarily mean depression that is severe enough to be treated by
   a psychiatrist. Often only mild forms of depression are involved. And
   when we speak of goals we do not necessarily mean long-term, thought
   out goals. For many or most people through much of human history, the
   goals of a hand-to-mouth existence (merely providing oneself and one's
   family with food from day to day) have been quite sufficient.
   
   7. (Paragraph 52) A partial exception may be made for a few passive,
   inward looking groups, such as the Amish, which have little effect on
   the wider society. Apart from these, some genuine small-scale
   communities do exist in America today. For instance, youth gangs and
   "cults". Everyone regards them as dangerous, and so they are, because
   the members of these groups are loyal primarily to one another rather
   than to the system, hence the system cannot control them. Or take the
   gypsies. The gypsies commonly get away with theft and fraud because
   their loyalties are such that they can always get other gypsies to
   give testimony that "proves" their innocence. Obviously the system
   would be in serious trouble if too many people belonged to such
   groups. Some of the early-20th century Chinese thinkers who were
   concerned with modernizing China recognized the necessity of breaking
   down small-scale social groups such as the family: "(According to Sun
   Yat-sen) The Chinese people needed a new surge of patriotism, which
   would lead to a transfer of loyalty from the family to the state. .
   .(According to Li Huang) traditional attachments, particularly to the
   family had to be abandoned if nationalism were to develop to China."
   (Chester C. Tan, Chinese Political Thought in the Twentieth Century,"
   page 125, page 297.)
   
   8. (Paragraph 56) Yes, we know that 19th century America had its
   problems, and serious ones, but for the sake of breviety we have to
   express ourselves in simplified terms.
   
   9. (Paragraph 61) We leave aside the underclass. We are speaking of
   the mainstream.
   
   10. (Paragraph 62) Some social scientists, educators, "mental health"
   professionals and the like are doing their best to push the social
   drives into group 1 by trying to see to it that everyone has a
   satisfactory social life.
   
   11. (Paragraphs 63, 82) Is the drive for endless material acquisition
   really an artificial creation of the advertising and marketing
   industry? Certainly there is no innate human drive for material
   acquisition. There have been many cultures in which people have
   desired little material wealth beyond what was necessary to satisfy
   their basic physical needs (Australian aborigines, traditional Mexican
   peasant culture, some African cultures). On the other hand there have
   also been many pre-industrial cultures in which material acquisition
   has played an important role. So we can't claim that today's
   acquisition-oriented culture is exclusively a creation of the
   advertising and marketing industry. But it is clear that the
   advertising and marketing industry has had an important part in
   creating that culture. The big corporations that spend millions on
   advertising wouldn't be spending that kind of money without solid
   proof that they were getting it back in increased sales. One member of
   FC met a sales manager a couple of years ago who was frank enough to
   tell him, "Our job is to make people buy things they don't want and
   don't need." He then described how an untrained novice could present
   people with the facts about a product, and make no sales at all, while
   a trained and experienced professional salesman would make lots of
   sales to the same people. This shows that people are manipulated into
   buying things they don't really want.
   
   12. (Paragraph 64) The problem of purposelessness seems to have become
   less serious during the last 15 years or so, because people now feel
   less secure physically and economically than they did earlier, and the
   need for security provides them with a goal. But purposelessness has
   been replaced by frustration over the difficulty of attaining
   security. We emphasize the problem of purposelessness because the
   liberals and leftists would wish to solve our social problems by
   having society guarantee everyone's security; but if that could be
   done it would only bring back the problem of purposelessness. The real
   issue is not whether society provides well or poorly for people's
   security; the trouble is that people are dependent on the system for
   their security rather than having it in their own hands. This, by the
   way, is part of the reason why some people get worked up about the
   right to bear arms; possession of a gun puts that aspect of their
   security in their own hands.
   
   13. (Paragraph 66) Conservatives' efforts to decrease the amount of
   government regulation are of little benefit to the average man. For
   one thing, only a fraction of the regulations can be eliminated
   because most regulations are necessary. For another thing, most of the
   deregulation affects business rather than the average individual, so
   that its main effect is to take power from the government and give it
   to private corporations. What this means for the average man is that
   government interference in his life is replaced by interference from
   big corporations, which may be permitted, for example, to dump more
   chemicals that get into his water supply and give him cancer. The
   conservatives are just taking the average man for a sucker, exploiting
   his resentment of Big Government to promote the power of Big Business.
   
   
   14. (Paragraph 73) When someone approves of the purpose for which
   propaganda is being used in a given case, he generally calls it
   "education" or applies to it some similar euphemism. But propaganda is
   propaganda regardless of the purpose for which it is used.
   
   15. (Paragraph 83) We are not expressing approval or disapproval of
   the Panama invasion. We only use it to illustrate a point.
   
   16. (Paragraph 95) When the American colonies were under British rule
   there were fewer and less effective legal guarantees of freedom than
   there were after the American Constitution went into effect, yet there
   was more personal freedom in pre-industrial America, both before and
   after the War of Independence, than there was after the Industrial
   Revolution took hold in this country. We quote from "Violence in
   America: Historical and Comparative perspectives," edited by Hugh
   Davis Graham and Ted Robert Gurr, Chapter 12 by Roger Lane, pages
   476-478: "The progressive heightening of standards of property, and
   with it the increasing reliance on official law enforcement (in 19th
   century America). . .were common to the whole society. . .[T]he change
   in social behavior is so long term and so widespread as to suggest a
   connection with the most fundamental of contemporary social processes;
   that of industrial urbanization itself. . ."Massachusetts in 1835 had
   a population of some 660,940, 81 percent rural, overwhelmingly
   preindustrial and native born. It's citizens were used to considerable
   personal freedom. Whether teamsters, farmers or artisans, they were
   all accustomed to setting their own schedules, and the nature of their
   work made them physically dependent on each other. . .Individual
   problems, sins or even crimes, were not generally cause for wider
   social concern. . ."But the impact of the twin movements to the city
   and to the factory, both just gathering force in 1835, had a
   progressive effect on personal behavior throughout the 19th century
   and into the 20th. The factory demanded regularity of behavior, a life
   governed by obedience to the rhythms of clock and calendar, the
   demands of foreman and supervisor. In the city or town, the needs of
   living in closely packed neighborhoods inhibited many actions
   previously unobjectionable.
   
   Both blue- and white-collar employees in larger establishments were
   mutually dependent on their fellows. as one man's work fit into
   another's, so one man's business was no longer his own. "The results
   of the new organization of life and work were apparent by 1900, when
   some 76 percent of the 2,805,346 inhabitants of Massachusetts were
   classified as urbanites. Much violent or irregular behavior which had
   been tolerable in a casual, independent society was no longer
   acceptable in the more formalized, cooperative atmosphere of the later
   period. . .The move to the cities had, in short, produced a more
   tractable, more socialized, more 'civilized' generation than its
   predecessors."
   
   17. (Paragraph 117) Apologists for the system are fond of citing cases
   in which elections have been decided by one or two votes, but such
   cases are rare.
   
   18. (Paragraph 119) "Today, in technologically advanced lands, men
   live very similar lives in spite of geographical, religious and
   political differences. The daily lives of a Christian bank clerk in
   Chicago, a Buddhist bank clerk in Tokyo, a Communist bank clerk in
   Moscow are far more alike than the life any one of them is like that
   of any single man who lived a thousand years ago. These similarities
   are the result of a common technology. . ." L. Sprague de Camp, "The
   Ancient Engineers," Ballentine edition, page 17.
   
   The lives of the three bank clerks are not IDENTICAL. Ideology does
   have SOME effect. But all technological societies, in order to
   survive, must evolve along APPROXIMATELY the same trajectory.
   
   19. (Paragraph 123) Just think an irresponsible genetic engineer might
   create a lot of terrorists.
   
   20. (Paragraph 124) For a further example of undesirable consequences
   of medical progress, suppose a reliable cure for cancer is discovered.
   Even if the treatment is too expensive to be available to any but the
   elite, it will greatly reduce their incentive to stop the escape of
   carcinogens into the environment.
   
   21. (Paragraph 128) Since many people may find paradoxical the notion
   that a large number of good things can add up to a bad thing, we will
   illustrate with an analogy. Suppose Mr. A is playing chess with Mr. B.
   Mr. C, a Grand Master, is looking over Mr. A's shoulder. Mr. A of
   course wants to win his game, so if Mr. C points out a good move for
   him to make, he is doing Mr. A a favor. But suppose now that Mr. C
   tells Mr. A how to make ALL of his moves. In each particular instance
   he does Mr. A a favor by showing him his best move, but by making ALL
   of his moves for him he spoils the game, since there is not point in
   Mr. A's playing the game at all if someone else makes all his moves.
   
   The situation of modern man is analogous to that of Mr. A. The system
   makes an individual's life easier for him in innumerable ways, but in
   doing so it deprives him of control over his own fate.
   
   22. (Paragraph 137) Here we are considering only the conflict of
   values within the mainstream. For the sake of simplicity we leave out
   of the picture "outsider" values like the idea that wild nature is
   more important than human economic welfare.
   
   23. (Paragraph 137) Self-interest is not necessarily MATERIAL
   self-interest. It can consist in fulfillment of some psychological
   need, for example, by promoting one's own ideology or religion.
   
   24. (Paragraph 139) A qualification: It is in the interest of the
   system to permit a certain prescribed degree of freedom in some areas.
   For example, economic freedom (with suitable limitations and
   restraints) has proved effective in promoting economic growth. But
   only planned, circumscribed, limited freedom is in the interest of the
   system. The individual must always be kept on a leash, even if the
   leash is sometimes long( see paragraphs 94, 97).
   
   25. (Paragraph 143) We don't mean to suggest that the efficiency or
   the potential for survival of a society has always been inversely
   proportional to the amount of pressure or discomfort to which the
   society subjects people. That is certainly not the case. There is good
   reason to believe that many primitive societies subjected people to
   less pressure than the European society did, but European society
   proved far more efficient than any primitive society and always won
   out in conflicts with such societies because of the advantages
   conferred by technology.
   
   26. (Paragraph 147) If you think that more effective law enforcement
   is unequivocally good because it suppresses crime, then remember that
   crime as defined by the system is not necessarily what YOU would call
   crime. Today, smoking marijuana is a "crime," and, in some places in
   the U.S.., so is possession of ANY firearm, registered or not, may be
   made a crime, and the same thing may happen with disapproved methods
   of child-rearing, such as spanking. In some countries, expression of
   dissident political opinions is a crime, and there is no certainty
   that this will never happen in the U.S., since no constitution or
   political system lasts forever.
   
   If a society needs a large, powerful law enforcement establishment,
   then there is something gravely wrong with that society; it must be
   subjecting people to severe pressures if so many refuse to follow the
   rules, or follow them only because forced. Many societies in the past
   have gotten by with little or no formal law-enforcement.
   
   27. (Paragraph 151) To be sure, past societies have had means of
   influencing behavior, but these have been primitive and of low
   effectiveness compared with the technological means that are now being
   developed.
   
   28. (Paragraph 152) However, some psychologists have publicly
   expressed opinions indicating their contempt for human freedom. And
   the mathematician Claude Shannon was quoted in Omni (August 1987) as
   saying, "I visualize a time when we will be to robots what dogs are to
   humans, and I'm rooting for the machines."
   
   29. (Paragraph 154) This is no science fiction! After writing
   paragraph 154 we came across an article in Scientific American
   according to which scientists are actively developing techniques for
   identifying possible future criminals and for treating them by a
   combination of biological and psychological means. Some scientists
   advocate compulsory application of the treatment, which may be
   available in the near future. (See "Seeking the Criminal Element", by
   W. Wayt Gibbs, Scientific American, March 1995.) Maybe you think this
   is OK because the treatment would be applied to those who might become
   drunk drivers (they endanger human life too), then perhaps to peel who
   spank their children, then to environmentalists who sabotage logging
   equipment, eventually to anyone whose behavior is inconvenient for the
   system.
   
   30. (Paragraph 184) A further advantage of nature as a counter-ideal
   to technology is that, in many people, nature inspires the kind of
   reverence that is associated with religion, so that nature could
   perhaps be idealized on a religious basis. It is true that in many
   societies religion has served as a support and justification for the
   established order, but it is also true that religion has often
   provided a basis for rebellion. Thus it may be useful to introduce a
   religious element into the rebellion against technology, the more so
   because Western society today has no strong religious foundation.
   
   Religion, nowadays either is used as cheap and transparent support for
   narrow, short-sighted selfishness (some conservatives use it this
   way), or even is cynically exploited to make easy money (by many
   evangelists), or has degenerated into crude irrationalism
   (fundamentalist Protestant sects, "cults"), or is simply stagnant
   (Catholicism, main-line Protestantism). The nearest thing to a strong,
   widespread, dynamic religion that the West has seen in recent times
   has been the quasi-religion of leftism, but leftism today is
   fragmented and has no clear, unified inspiring goal.
   
   Thus there is a religious vaccuum in our society that could perhaps be
   filled by a religion focused on nature in opposition to technology.
   But it would be a mistake to try to concoct artificially a religion to
   fill this role. Such an invented religion would probably be a failure.
   Take the "Gaia" religion for example. Do its adherents REALLY believe
   in it or are they just play-acting? If they are just play-acting their
   religion will be a flop in the end.
   
   It is probably best not to try to introduce religion into the conflict
   of nature vs. technology unless you REALLY believe in that religion
   yourself and find that it arouses a deep, strong, genuine response in
   many other people.
   
   31. (Paragraph 189) Assuming that such a final push occurs.
   Conceivably the industrial system might be eliminated in a somewhat
   gradual or piecemeal fashion. (see paragraphs 4, 167 and Note 4).
   
   32. (Paragraph 193) It is even conceivable (remotely) that the
   revolution might consist only of a massive change of attitudes toward
   technology resulting in a relatively gradual and painless
   disintegration of the industrial system. But if this happens we'll be
   very lucky. It's far more probably that the transition to a
   nontechnological society will be very difficult and full of conflicts
   and disasters.
   
   33. (Paragraph 195) The economic and technological structure of a
   society are far more important than its political structure in
   determining the way the average man lives (see paragraphs 95, 119 and
   Notes 16, 18).
   
   34. (Paragraph 215) This statement refers to our particular brand of
   anarchism. A wide variety of social attitudes have been called
   "anarchist," and it may be that many who consider themselves
   anarchists would not accept our statement of paragraph 215. It should
   be noted, by the way, that there is a nonviolent anarchist movement
   whose members probably would not accept FC as anarchist and certainly
   would not approve of FC's violent methods.
   
   35. (Paragraph 219) Many leftists are motivated also by hostility, but
   the hostility probably results in part from a frustrated need for
   power.
   
   36. (Paragraph 229) It is important to understand that we mean someone
   who sympathizes with these MOVEMENTS as they exist today in our
   society. One who believes that women, homosexuals, etc., should have
   equal rights is not necessarily a leftist. The feminist, gay rights,
   etc., movements that exist in our society have the particular
   ideological tone that characterizes leftism, and if one believes, for
   example, that women should have equal rights it does not necessarily
   follow that one must sympathize with the feminist movement as it
   exists today.
   
   If copyright problems make it impossible for this long quotation to be
   printed, then please change Note 16 to read as follows:
   
   16. (Paragraph 95) When the American colonies were under British rule
   there were fewer and less effective legal guarantees of freedom than
   there were after the American Constitution went into effect, yet there
   was more personal freedom in pre-industrial America, both before and
   after the War of Independence, than there was after the Industrial
   Revolution took hold in this country. In "Violence in America:
   Historical and Comparative Perspectives," edited by Hugh Davis Graham
   and Ted Robert Gurr, Chapter 12 by Roger Lane, it is explained how in
   pre-industrial America the average person had greater independence and
   autonomy than he does today, and how the process of industrialization
   necessarily led to the restriction of personal freedom.
     _________________________________________________________________
   
